# The Internet: a "nuts and bolts" view

## Devices:
    Hosts = end systems
    running network apps at internet's "edge"

## Packet Switches:
    Forward packets (chunks of data)
    * Router, switches
## Communication Links
  * Fiber, copper, satalite
  * Transmission rate, bandwith
## Networks
* collection of devices, routers, links: managed by an organization

## Internet "network of networks"
* Interconnected ISP's
## Protocols are everywhere
* Control sending, receiving of messages
* e.g., HTTP (Web), streaming video, Skype, TCP, IP, Wifi, 4/5G, Ethernet
## Internet Standards
* RFC: Request for comments
* IETF: Internet Engineering Task Force
## Infastructure that provides services to applications
* Web, streaming video, teleconferencing, email, games, social media
## Provides programming interface ot distrubuted applicatoins:

# What is a protocol:
# Human Protocol:
* What is the time?
* I have a question
# Rules for:
* Specific messages sent
* What actions taken
* When message received, or other events
## Network Protocols:
* Computers (devices) rather than humans
* All communication activity in internat governed by protocols
* Prorocols define the format, order of messages sent received among network entities, and actions taken on message transmission receipt


## Network edge:
* Hosts: clients and servers
* servers often in data centers
## Network access, physical media:
* Wired, wireless communication links
## Network Core:
* Interconnected routers
* Network of networks

## How to connect end systems to edge router?
* Residental access nets
* Institutional access networks
* mobile access networks (WiFi, 4G/5G)










* Networks: Home network, mobile network
* Your home connects to local isp
* Local isp connects to main ISP
* Protocol: Rule of communication
* Frequency Division Multiplexing (FDM): different channels transmitted in different frequency bands
* Packet transmission delay = time needed to transmit L-bit packet into link = L / R
* Local decision is forwarding, global decision is routing
* 



READ 1.1 - 1.3
* End systems access internet through Internet Service Providors (ISPs)
* Residential ISPs like local cable or telephone companies, corporate ISPs, University ISPs, ISPs in airports hotels coffee shops.
* ISP is a network of patcket switches and communication links.
* Each ISP provide variety of network access to end systems
* ISPs that provide access to end systems must also be interconnected.
* Lower tier ISPs are interconnected through national and international upper-tier ISPs
* Upper-tier ISPs are connected directly to eachother
* Upper-tier consists of high-speed routers interconnectd with high-speed fiber-optic links.
* Each ISP is managed independently, runs IP protocol, conforms to naming and address conventions.

* End systems, packet switches... run protocols that control the send and receive of internet.
* Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) and Internet Protocol (IP) are two most important
* IP specifies the format of packets that are sent and received
* Internet standards are developed by the Internet engineering Task force using requests for comments (RFCs)

* An infastructure that provides services to applications. 
* Applications are distributed applications if they involve multiple end systems that exchange data.
* End systems on internet provide a socker interface that specifies how a program on one system asks the Internet to deliver data to a destination.

* What is a protocol: TCP connection request -> TCP connection reply <- GET http... -> <file> <-
* It takes two or more communicating entities running same protocol to accompish task
* Hardware implemented protocols between two connected computers control the flow of bits on the "wire". Congestion controls protocols in end systems control the rate at which packets are transmitted between sender and receiver


# 1.2
* Computers are called end systems because they are at edge of internet
* Also called hosts because they host (run) applications
* Data centers are engines behind internet applications
* Cloud computing: major trend is for companies to not manage their own data, but run web based services in amazon cloud AWS
* Most prevelant types of broadband access are digital subscriber line (DSL) and cable.
* Obtain DSL through local telephone company (telco). A customers telco is also ISP.
* Customers DSL modem uses existing telephone line to exchange data with DSL multiplexer (DSLAM)
* Homes DSL modem takes digital data and translates it to high frequency tones for transmission over telephone wires. Analog signal is translated back into digital at DSLAM
* High-speed downstream channel, in 50kHz to 1 MHz band
* Medium-speed upstream channel in 4kHz to 50kHz band
* Ordinary two-way telephone channel in 0 to 4kHz band
* On customer side: splitter separates data and telephone siganls.
* On telco side, DSLAM separates data and phone signals and sends data to internet.
* DSL standard defines transmission rates, downstream rates of 14 mbs and 52mbs. Upstream of 3.5mbps and 16mbps. 
* Engineers designed DSL for short distances between home and CO.
* Fiber optics can connect cables to neighborhood level junctions where coaxial cable is used to rach individual homes. Cable internet access requires special modems called cable modems. Cable model is usually external device connects to pc through ethernet.
* At the cable head end, the cable modem termination system (CMTS) serves similar function as the DSL networks DSLAM, turning analog signal into digital
* Cable modems divide the HFC network into two channels, down and upstream
* Downstream is typically allocated higher transmission rate. 
* DOCSIS 2.0 and 3.0 standard define downstram of 40Mbs and 1.2Gbps, and upstream of 30Mbps and 100Mbps.
* Shared borad cast mediums have every packet send by head end travel downstream on every link to every home. and every packet send by a home travels on the upstream to the head end. If several users are simultaneously doing something on downstream, the actual rate each user receives will be significantly lower than aggregate cable down stream rate.
* Fiber to the gome FTTH can provide in the gigabits per second 
* Active optical networks (AONs) and passive optical networks (PONs).
* AON is esentially swithced ethernet.
* With PON, each home has a optical network terminator (ONT), which is connected by dedicated optical fiber to neighborhood splitter. Home users connect a home router to the ONT and access internet via this. in PON architecture, all packets sent from OLT to splitter are replicated at the splitter.
* 5G fixed wireless uses beam-forming technology, data is sent wirelessly form a providers base station to the modem in the home. Wifi wireless router is connected the the modem
* On corp or uni campuses, local area network (LAN) is used to connect an end system to the edge router.
* Ethernet is most prevelant.
* Unlike Wifi, 3G and LTE 4g and 5G users must be within a few tens of kilometers from station unline wifi where its tens of meters
* Mobile access uses the radio spectrum
* For each transmitter-receiver pair, bits are sent by propogating electromagnetic waves or optical pulses across a physical medium.
* Exampes of physical medium include twisted pair copper wire, coaxial cable, multimode fiber optic cable, terrestrail radio spectrum, and stellite radio spectrum.
* Physical media fallso into two cegegories: guided media and unguided media.
* Guided media: waves are guided along a solid medium
* Unguided media: waves propagate in the atmosphere and in outer space, such as in wireless LAN
* Twisted pair copper wire is most commonly used and cheap. Consists of two insulated copper wires about 1mm thick, arranged in regular spiral pattern. Twisted together to reduce the electrial interference.
* Unshielded twisted pair (UTP) is commonly used for computer networks within a building, for LANs. Data rates can be achieved depending on thickness of wire and distance between transmitter and receiver.
* Coaxial Cable: consits of two copper conductors, but the conductors are concentric rather than parallel. This with special insulation and shielding allow to achience high data transmission rates. Common in television systems.
* Coaxial cable can be used as a guided shares medium. A number of end systems connectd directly to the cable.
* Fiber Optics: Thin flexible medium that conducts pulses of light to represent bits. Can support high bit rates. Immuse to electromagnetic interference, very low signal attenuation up to 100km, and are hard to tap.
* Terrestrail Radio Channels: Carry signals in electromagnetic spectrum. No physical wire, can penetrate walls, connectivity to mobile user. 
* Satellite Radio Channels: Links two or more earth based microwave transmitter receivers, known as ground station. Satellite receives transmission on one frequency band, regenerates signal using a repeater. Two types are used geostationary satellites and low-earth orbiting (LEO) satellites. Geo satellites permanently remain above same spot on earth. Substantial signal delay. Used in area without access to DSL or cable based internet acess. LEO satellites are placed much closer to earth. Rotate around earth.

# 1.3 The Network Core
* End systems exchange messages with eachother. Messages may perform control function, or can contain data.
* To send a messga efrom a source end system to destination end system, source breaks long messages into smaller chunks of data knows as packets. Each packet travels through communication links and packet switches.
* Most packet swithces use store-and-forward transmission at the inputs to the links. Means that the packet switch must receive the entire packet before it can begin to transmit the first bit of packet onto outbound link.
* Time taken to receive and process and send out is 2L/R
* L: L bits
* R: R bits per second
* Each packet switch has multiple links, for each link the packet switch has a output buffer (output queue) stores packets router is about to send.
* Buffer space is finite, if buffer is full then packet loss will occur.
* When a packet arrives at router in network, router examines portion of destination address a nd forwards packet to adjacent router. 
* Each router has a forwarding table that maps destination addresses to routers outbound links.

## 1.3.2 Circuit switching 
* Two fundamental approaches to moving data through network of links and switches: circuit switching and packet switching.
* In circuit switching networks, the resources needed along a path are reserved for duration of communication session. In packet switched networks therse resources are not.
* Since a given transmission rate has been reserved for this sender to receiver connection, the sender can transfer data to receiver at the guaranteed constant rate.
* Circuit in a link is implemented with either frequency-division multiplexing (FDM) or time division multiplexing (TDM).
* FDM, the frequency specrum of link is divided among the connections. Dedicated a frequency band to each nonnection for duration.
* TDM link, time is divided into frames of fixed duration, and each frams is divides into time slots. Network dedicates one time slot in every frame to this connection.

* Critics of packet switching argue that it is not suitable for real time services because of variable and unpreditable delays.
* Proponents of packet argue that it offers better sharing of transmission capacity than ciruit switching and its simpler and more efficent and less costly.

















* Routing: Path from source to destination ** PATH, SOURCE, DESTINATION / Global Path
* Forwarding: Local decision, Takes in information, output to correct router 



Shortest Path| B  | C   | F
          A|  a-b | a-b-c| 
          C|                c-e-f



* Packet transmission delay: takes L/R seconds to transmit (push out) L-bit packet into link at R bps
* store and forward: entire packet must arrive at router before it can be trnamsitted on next link
* Queueing occurs when work arrives faster than it can be serviced
* Packet queuing and loss: if arrival rate (in bps) to link exceeds transmission rate (bps) of linkl for some period of time:
  * Packet will queue, waiting to be trnasmitted on output link
  * packets can be dropped (lost) if memory (buffer) in router fills up

## Alternative to packet switching: curcuit switching
* Dedicated resources: no sharing curcuit like (gaurenteed) performance 
* Circuit segment idle if not used by call (no sharing)
* commonly used in traditional telephone networks

### Frequency Division Multiplexing (FDM)
* Optical, electromagnetic frequencies divided into (narrow) frequency bands
* Each call allocated its own brand, can transmit at max rate of that narrow band

### Time division Multiplexing (TDM)
* Time divided into slots
* Each call allocated periodic slot(s), can transmit at maximum rate of (wider) prequency band(only) during its time slot(s)